---
layout: ./_layout.astro
title: Lecture 1 — Basics
description: >
    Vim-style editor basics.
date: 2024-11-24
---

# Built-in documentation

(Neo)vim has all the documentation you could possibly need built in.

For a quick reference sheet, see `:h quickref`.

For the full user manual, see `:h usr_01.txt`.

To get help with any command, keybinding, or setting, just `:h <thing>`.

There’s also http://vimcasts.org/, which I haven’t used myself, but I have seen referenced from other sites, so it’s probably reliable.

## Documentation naming conventions

Different types of items are named in different ways when using the `:help` command. If the thing you’re searching for is unambiguous, Vim is likely smart enough to find it for you. If there are multiple things with the same name, or the same keybinding in Normal and Insert mode, you should use the specific name to find the one you’re looking for.

- Commands — Prefix with a colon. `:h :g`
- Settings — Surround with single quotes. `:h 'background'`
- Normal-mode keys — Nothing. `:h CTRL-R`
- Insert-mode keys — Prefix with `i_`. `:h i_CTRL-R`
    - Notice that this keybinding is the same as the Normal-mode one above, so searching for just `CTRL-R` won’t get you to the insert-mode keybinding’s documentation.
- Other — Nothing. `:h ins-completion`

# Modes

Explain normal mode, insert mode, visual mode, and how to switch between them.

# Motions

Introduce some motions:

- Arrow key equivalents: `h`, `j`, `k`, `l`.
- Within line: `0`, `^`, `$`.
- Words: `w`, `e`, `b`, `W`, `E`, `B`.
- Word objects: `iw`, `aw`.
- Matching delimiter: `%`.

Repeat motions by prepending a number.

# Actions

Introduce the basic actions:

- Delete: `d`.
- Change: `c`.
- Replace: `r`.
- Repeat last action: `.`.

# Visual selections

Explain how to use visual mode to select text to perform actions on.

Switch selection direction: `o`. Demonstrate why this is useful.

Explain character-wise vs. line-wise selection/motions.

# Searching

`/`, `?`, `n`, `N`.

Search history, search highlighting.

# Commands

Introduce commands and addresses.

Explain the `:substitute`/`:s` command.

# More motions

Introduce more motions:

- Sentences: `(`, `)`.
- Paragraphs: `{`, `}`.
- Top/bottom: `gg`, `G`.
- Page-wise scrolling: `C-u`, `C-d`.
- Finding characters: `f`, `t`, `F`, `T`, `;`, `,`.

# More actions

Join line below: `J`.
